
           10.1 This chapter is concerned with the safety of staff and pupils in schools,
           and in particular with their protection against violence. It is written primarily
           from a Scottish standpoint. In some cases violence may take the form of an
           attack by an unauthorised intruder, such as Thomas Hamilton. In other cases
           a person who has gained access to the school on some basis, such as being
           a parent or having some work to perform, becomes violent when he is there.
           Not all attacks are premeditated. Some might arise spontaneously, when the
           aggressor is, for example, under the influence of drink or drugs, suffers from
           some form of mental instability or simply loses self-control in an excess of
           anger. 
           10.3 
           It is also recognised that there should be arrangements for security to
           prevent unauthorised access to the school. However, so far as I have been
           able to determine, there has been little, if any, published guidance on tackling
           the dangers which an unauthorised intruder could pose to the school
           population at large, and in particular its pupils. 
           10.4 
           No doubt the existence and
           use of the law will have some deterrent effect. However, in this chapter I am
           concentrating on a proactive approach to the subject. 
           
Factors for consideration 
           10.5 It is understandable that in the aftermath of what happened at Dunblane
           Primary School there should be calls for additional measures to protect the
           school population, either in the form of physical alterations to schools or an
           increase in the extent to which access to them is supervised. However, it is
           plain that schools vary greatly across the country in regard to their nature,
           size, layout and age. What would be appropriate for an inner city school of
           700 pupils would be unlikely to be suitable for an isolated rural school. Some
           older schools may be housed in accommodation originally designed for a
           different purpose. Some schools may operate on split sites. Some methods
           of opening locked doors could be operated by older children but would be
           impracticable for younger or disabled children. 

           10.7 In considering any particular measure it is clearly necessary to consider
           not merely whether and to what extent it would be practicable and effective
           but also whether it would be acceptable. The point has often been made that
           schools should be welcoming places. Many schools represent a community
           facility, receiving adults for evening classes and recreation. It would be
           unacceptable to carry measures to the point where schools were turned into
           fortresses. At some point a balance has to be struck. 

           10.8 Whatever measures are to be taken it is unrealistic to expect that the
           risk of a violent intruder gaining access to a school can be eliminated. All
           that can be done is to take whatever measures are reasonably practicable. 

           10.10 The principal legal basis for the responsibility for the protection of
           staff against violence which they encounter in the course of their work lies
           in section 2 of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, under which every
           employer has "to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health,
           safety and welfare at work of all his employees". This duty is not confined to
           the physical working environment but covers also the provision of
           information, training and supervision. Subsection (3) of section 2 supports
           the main provision by imposing a duty to prepare and issue a statement of
           policy and the organisation and arrangements for carrying it out. 

           10.11 At the same time every employer has a duty under section 3 "to
           conduct his undertaking in such a way as to ensure, so far is reasonably
           practicable, that persons not in his employment who may be affected thereby
           are not exposed to risk to their health and safety". 

           Legal responsibility 
           10.14 Firstly, it is important that there should be no misunderstanding as to
           the persons on whom the legal responsibility for safety, and hence the
           responsibility for seeing that action is taken, lies. An employer may delegate
           the performance of various functions to others but he cannot delegate his
           responsibility under the Act. Thus, purely by way of example, recent
           decisions have shown that employers cannot avoid their duty under section 3
           by pointing to the extent to which they have delegated their functions to an
           independent contractor or by showing that senior management were not
           involved in the breach (R v Associated Octel Co Ltd [1994] IRLR 540; and R v
           British Steel plc [1995] ICR587). 

           Access to the school 
           10.21 It may be of value to consider whether the school should have one or
           more than one line of defence. Should the first line of defence be the
           boundary which defines the grounds of the school. Should attention be given
           to walls, fences or gates? Should steps be taken in other ways to restrict
           public access to or through the grounds? 

           10.22 Next, turning to the playground, should it be lit in the evenings and in
           winter? Are there any special risks associated with outlying buildings,
           courtyards or the school car park? Is there a need for surveillance by closed
           circuit television? 

           10.23 As regards the means of entry to the school buildings, there may be
           scope for restricting access by reducing the number of doors or by modifying
           them. However, that may have to be balanced against a number of other
           factors. Should some subsidiary doors be altered so as to operate as fire
           doors, opening outwards only? Should there be some form of special entry
           system? Should this require locks which can be operated by means of a
           code? Or should it be an entryphone system, which may involve additional
           manning? Is some form of surveillance of the entry points required? Each of
           these methods may involve significant drawbacks, such as presenting a
           forbidding aspect or creating difficulty for children to understand and use.
           Should any of the windows be modified so as to prevent them being used as
           a means of entry? 

           10.24 Taking next the reception of those who visit the school, should parents
           and others be required to give advance notice of their intention to visit?
           Should some form of surveillance be installed at subsidiary points of entry?
           Are the signs in the school adequate to provide clear directions to a
           reception point? What staff, such as a janitor or a secretary, should be on
           hand to speak to those entering the school? What training should they have
           for dealing with aggressive visitors? What backup should they have? Should
           there be a system whereby all visitors sign in and sign out? Should there be
           badges to indicate who are members of staff and who are visitors? 

           Dealing with emergencies 
           10.25 Let me suppose a situation in which some untoward incident is
           imminent or is already in progress. The object will be to contain and defuse
           the situation on the one hand; and on the other make sure that staff have
           immediate support and can call for assistance. The first points to the need
           for staff to receive regular training in dealing with aggression, acquiring
           knowledge of security procedures and equipment and in general cultivating a
           sense of safety awareness. The latter involves a consideration of physical
           measures which will depend very much on the school layout. It may be
           appropriate to consider panic buttons or telephones, especially in regard to
           outlying buildings. Personal alarms for teachers may be required. Closed
           circuit television may be of some assistance but if it is to help in averting or
           minimising the effect of incidents it will require to be monitored. Pupils can
           be encouraged to play their part by being alert to the presence of strangers
           and aware of security and evacuation procedures. 

          